NAME
     Inferno emu on Palm Tungsten T3 (and under similar palm
     handhelds, see notes).

DESCRIPTION
     This lab collects some personal/informal notes that I took
     while setting up setup Inferno emu running hosted on a T3, 
     the main reasons for doing this are:

     1.   Wanted to experiment with Inferno

     2.   Get tired of the 'traditional' way of using a computer
          and by extension a handheld (both POS and Linux), and
          wanting to employ my time in more useful things.

     3.   after some time using Inferno i've noticed that it has
          all i need, and the pieces that Inferno doesn't have
          (ogg, mp3, etc.) can be borrowed from the host OS
          (Linux).

     The first section covers the hardware available on the T3,
     the second section talks about how to setup Linux on the T3,
     and finishes talking about the setup of Inferno itself to
     perform some typical tasks, which includes brief notes on
     how to compile and run emu on T3.

  Hardware
     I'm going to center in the hardware that is currently 
     supported under Linux, and hence available for Inferno
     hosted, there are some good reviews about the T3 one that
     it's worth mention is ppptun3

     In summary we can use:

     -    SD card support for storage

     -    a nice 320x480 TFT LCD for graphics

     -    audio support both for playing and recording

     -    and buttons and touchscreen for input

     -    networking: we have are usb (usbnet), IR (not tested,
          but should work) and BT (not working due to lack of
          specs).

     It's important to note that T3 as the other palm handhelds
          have reset features that are useful to recover of some
          errors, you can read about at resets.

  Setting up Linux
  Booting
     The procedure for booting Inferno can be sumarized in:
     1) boot POS (default from ROM) ->
     2)	run Garux (from SD Card, 1st partition FAT16) ->
     3)		start Linux (using rootfs from 1st partition of SD Card) ->
     4)			start Inferno emu-fb (from a /etc/init.d/inferno script)

     As Garux is run from Palm OS (POS), the SD card where garux
     is stored needs to be recognized from POS, which has a
     FAT16, hence maximum tested SD card size is 1Gb.

     This 1Gb SD card can be partitioned the following way,

          part1 FAT16 30Mb, to store garux and the rootfs, kernel
          modules and other files needed to boot Linux.

          part2 ext3 970Mb, to store Inferno and media
          (audio,docs,...).

     All the files and a small howto with instructions on how to
     boot Linux on a T3 can be found at t3 linux On the same
     place there's a guide to flash the SmallRom partition which
     holds the POS bootloader, to be able to suspend/resume the
     T3, otherwise you have to reset the handheld each time you
     want to power off and booting again takes it's time.

  Setting up Inferno
     Given the hardware available on T3 (and handhelds in
     general) it's wise to keep the system as small and simple as
     possible. So the hardware devices are managed by the linux
     kernel, which provices access to them through the /dev/
     devices; /dev/fbX for the graphics frame buffer,
     /dev/input/eventX for input events (touchscreen and keys)
     and /dev/dsp for audio. This devices can be managed by the
     emu-fb version written by Alexander Syschev for the iPAQ
     3970 (arm) and pc platforms that was posted on the
     inferno-list see the 'Inferno emu with Linux framebuffer
     support' message and can be easily addapted to work with T3¸
     see the 'using Inferno on Palm' message on inferno-list too.

     The advantage is that you don't need an X server and all
     it's deps on such a small device you just launch the emu-fb
     from the console. On the drawbacks are that you loose the
     hability to lauch ps/pdf viewers like gv/xpdf, anyway i
     haven't found gv/postscript interpreters on Familiar, i
     guess it's too much bloated for small devices.

     The audio support could be done by using the legacy OSS
     interface, there's emulation of it from ALSA, because many
     old programs still rely on it, which i send to the
     inferno-list with the subject 'devaudio for Linux' so audio
     support can be easily added.

     The next thing was having a WM/GUI suitable for such small
     screen dimensions but by using the rio like wm/wm from
     caerwyn, works fine.

     And creating a nice guide file with the frequently launched
     commands, i.e. play music, raise/lower audio volume, toggle
     backlight, etc.

     This guide can be opened with acme -c1 -l acme.dump, started
     by default from wmsetup.

     Only recommendation is that to take advantatge of the small
     screen space available is a good practice to keep the names
     of files/directories short so they can fit in one like in
     the Acme editor. And a nice thing is that you can even do
     snarfing and chording easily with the stylus.

     If you haven't heard about rio, acme and plumber before,
     take a careful read to the Plan 9 papers in the REFERENCES
     section.

  Experiments
     9pod: (kind of 9pod, like it was said some time ago on
     9fans.)

     voip: 	one thing that i would like to be able to do is to be
     able to share 	the audio device '#A' with a remote computer
     (for start just one), this will 	allow me to be able to talk
     with other people, over the net, i know that there're 	are a
     lot of projects out there that already give you that, but i
     wanted something 	simple thus, the most simple that i could
     think was:
     styxlisten tcp!firulillo!styx export '#A';
     mount tcp!firulillo!styx /n/remote;
     stream /dev/audio /n/remote/audio;

     	The above example sort of works, only drawback is that
     sound is played slow 	on a 100Mb LAN connection between two
     Linux hosts running Inferno emu. 	So the next refinement
     could be to compress the data before sending 	it and
     decompress on receiving it:
     cat /n/local/home/salva/.mpd/music/misc/mymymy.mp3 | 
     	os madplay -Q -o wave:- - | wav2iaf | auplay -

NOTES
     1.   A list of handhelds's running Linux, the status of the
          ports and hardware list can be consulted at supported
          handhelds

     2.   This talk is about T3, changes to run Inferno emu on
          another handheld model will be left intentionally as an
          exercise to the interested reader.

REFERENCES
     ididit

     hackndev

     handhelds

     toolchains

     Plan 9 papers

FILES
     67

                         Inferno Manual
