NAME
     lab 16 - set up a styx service for active essays

DESCRIPTION
     I created a readonly unauthenticated styx service for
     readers of IPN, who have inferno installed, and want to read
     the lab notes in acme and execute the embedded scripts. From
     here on I'll use the term canto for active essays authored
     and "read" (rather to execute or chant) in the Inferno
     environment.

     This entry in my notebook is my first attempt of the new
     style. It describes the files and formats of the service.

     Mount the service and open acme on the file for this lab.
     	mkdir /n/canto
     	mount -A tcp!canto.hopto.org!6700 /n/canto
     	acme -c1 /n/canto/16/index.txt

     Each canto is in a numbered directory containing the
     following files:

     text the raw contents of the notes in man(6) format

     post.html
          the text file converted to html using man2html for
          sending to the blog.

     guide
          the file containing executable code within acme (see
          below)

     index.txt
          the main contents, usually text formatted using man(1).

     Instead of embedding possibly long scripts within the main
     text, they are in the guide file, and at the appropriate
     point in the text are referenced. Right click on the link
     and then middle click on the selected text.
     	guide:/^pi/+1

     While reading a canto at least three frames will be open;
     the index.txt, the guide file containing the executable
     expressions, and the Errors file containing the output from
     the scripts. I prefer to run acme with one column which
     fills half the screen and leave the other half of the screen
     for windows I open such as shell windows, debugger, task
     manager, etc.
     	guide:/^man/+1

     The canto directory also contains limbo source code,
     possibly a mkfile and the executable dis files. The canto
     will contain links to the source instead of directly
     embedding samples in the text. E.g.
     	man2html.b:1
     This will open other windows in acme and jump to the point
     in the code being discussed in the text.

                         Inferno Manual
